cpd/python/QUICKSTART.md, before:

# Quickstart (MVP-A)

## 1. Install from PyPI (release artifacts)

```bash
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
python -m pip install changepoint-doctor==0.0.2
python -c "import cpd; print(cpd.__version__)"
```

## 2. Build and import the extension (from source)

```bash
cd cpd/python
python -m pip install --upgrade pip maturin
maturin develop --release --manifest-path ../crates/cpd-python/Cargo.toml
python -m pip install --upgrade ".[dev]"
python -c "import cpd; print(cpd.__version__)"
```

If you are on Apple Silicon, run the architecture verification and troubleshooting
steps in
[`../docs/python_apple_silicon_toolchain.md`](../docs/python_apple_silicon_toolchain.md)
before or after this build step when diagnosing linker/import failures.

> Install/import naming: install with `python -m pip install changepoint-doctor`, then import with `import cpd` in Python. Optional compatibility alias: `import changepoint_doctor as cpd`.

## 3. Detect change points with high-level APIs

```python
import numpy as np
import cpd

x = np.concatenate([
    np.zeros(50, dtype=np.float64),
    np.full(50, 5.0, dtype=np.float64),
    np.full(50, -2.0, dtype=np.float64),
])

pelt_result = cpd.Pelt(model="l2", min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2)
binseg_result = cpd.Binseg(model="l2", min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2)
fpop_result = cpd.Fpop(min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2)

print("PELT breakpoints:", pelt_result.breakpoints)
print("BinSeg breakpoints:", binseg_result.breakpoints)
print("FPOP breakpoints:", fpop_result.breakpoints)
```

Expected breakpoints:

```text
[50, 100, 150]
```

## 4. Use low-level `detect_offline(...)`

For mode semantics (`strict`/`balanced`/`fast`) and reproducibility guarantees,
see [`../docs/reproducibility_modes.md`](../docs/reproducibility_modes.md).

```python
low_level = cpd.detect_offline(
    x,
    detector="pelt",
    cost="l2",
    constraints={
        "min_segment_len": 2,
        "jump": 1,
        "max_change_points": 4,
    },
    stopping={"n_bkps": 2},
    preprocess={
        "detrend": {"method": "linear"},
        "deseasonalize": {"method": "differencing", "period": 2},
        "winsorize": {},  # defaults to lower_quantile=0.01, upper_quantile=0.99
        "robust_scale": {},  # defaults to mad_epsilon=1e-9, normal_consistency=1.4826
    },  # optional; requires preprocess feature
    repro_mode="balanced",
    return_diagnostics=True,
)

print("Low-level breakpoints:", low_level.breakpoints)
print("Algorithm:", low_level.diagnostics.algorithm)
print("Cost model:", low_level.diagnostics.cost_model)
```

`preprocess` is strictly validated: unsupported keys or invalid method/parameter
combinations raise `ValueError`.

## 5. Serialize results and plot breakpoints

```python
import cpd
import numpy as np

x = np.concatenate([
    np.zeros(50, dtype=np.float64),
    np.full(50, 5.0, dtype=np.float64),
    np.full(50, -2.0, dtype=np.float64),
])

outputs = [
    cpd.Pelt(model="l2", min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2),
    cpd.Binseg(model="l2", min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2),
    cpd.Fpop(min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2),
    cpd.detect_offline(
        x,
        detector="pelt",
        cost="l2",
        constraints={"min_segment_len": 2},
        stopping={"n_bkps": 2},
    ),
]

restored_outputs = []
for result in outputs:
    payload = result.to_json()
    restored = cpd.OfflineChangePointResult.from_json(payload)
    assert restored.breakpoints == result.breakpoints
    assert restored.change_points == result.change_points
    restored_outputs.append(restored)

try:
    fig = restored_outputs[0].plot(x, title="Quickstart breakpoint view")
except ImportError:
    # Plotting is optional; install with `python -m pip install "changepoint-doctor[plot]==0.0.2"`.
    fig = None
```

Compatibility + limitations to keep in mind:

- `from_json(...)` accepts schema markers in the supported window (currently `1..=2`).
- `to_json()` emits the current writer marker (currently `1`).
- `plot()` is optional (`changepoint-doctor[plot]`) and `plot(ax=...)` is univariate-only.
- If `segments` are absent in a result, pass explicit `values` to `plot(...)`.

## 6. Run provided examples

```bash
cpd/python/.venv/bin/python cpd/python/examples/synthetic_signal.py
cpd/python/.venv/bin/python cpd/python/examples/csv_detect.py --csv /path/to/data.csv --column 0
cpd/python/.venv/bin/python cpd/python/examples/plot_breakpoints.py --out /tmp/cpd_breakpoints.png
```

Example scripts are exercised in CI/smoke coverage via
`cpd/python/tests/test_integration_mvp_a.py`.

## 7. Open notebook quickstarts

```bash
cd cpd/python
python -m pip install --upgrade "changepoint-doctor[notebooks]==0.0.2"
jupyter lab
```

Then open:

- `examples/notebooks/01_offline_algorithms.ipynb`
- `examples/notebooks/02_online_algorithms.ipynb`
- `examples/notebooks/03_doctor_recommendations.ipynb`

Commit message:

Implement CPD-no9.2 preprocess default wheel contract

cpd/python/QUICKSTART.md, after:

# Quickstart (MVP-A)

## 1. Install from PyPI (release artifacts)

```bash
python -m pip install --upgrade pip
python -m pip install changepoint-doctor==0.0.2
python -c "import cpd; print(cpd.__version__)"
```

## 2. Build and import the extension (from source)

```bash
cd cpd/python
python -m pip install --upgrade pip maturin
maturin develop --release --manifest-path ../crates/cpd-python/Cargo.toml
python -m pip install --upgrade ".[dev]"
python -c "import cpd; print(cpd.__version__)"
```

If you are on Apple Silicon, run the architecture verification and troubleshooting
steps in
[`../docs/python_apple_silicon_toolchain.md`](../docs/python_apple_silicon_toolchain.md)
before or after this build step when diagnosing linker/import failures.

> Install/import naming: install with `python -m pip install changepoint-doctor`, then import with `import cpd` in Python. Optional compatibility alias: `import changepoint_doctor as cpd`.

## 3. Detect change points with high-level APIs

```python
import numpy as np
import cpd

x = np.concatenate([
    np.zeros(50, dtype=np.float64),
    np.full(50, 5.0, dtype=np.float64),
    np.full(50, -2.0, dtype=np.float64),
])

pelt_result = cpd.Pelt(model="l2", min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2)
binseg_result = cpd.Binseg(model="l2", min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2)
fpop_result = cpd.Fpop(min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2)

print("PELT breakpoints:", pelt_result.breakpoints)
print("BinSeg breakpoints:", binseg_result.breakpoints)
print("FPOP breakpoints:", fpop_result.breakpoints)
```

Expected breakpoints:

```text
[50, 100, 150]
```

## 4. Use low-level `detect_offline(...)`

For mode semantics (`strict`/`balanced`/`fast`) and reproducibility guarantees,
see [`../docs/reproducibility_modes.md`](../docs/reproducibility_modes.md).

```python
low_level = cpd.detect_offline(
    x,
    detector="pelt",
    cost="l2",
    constraints={
        "min_segment_len": 2,
        "jump": 1,
        "max_change_points": 4,
    },
    stopping={"n_bkps": 2},
    preprocess={
        "detrend": {"method": "linear"},
        "deseasonalize": {"method": "differencing", "period": 2},
        "winsorize": {},  # defaults to lower_quantile=0.01, upper_quantile=0.99
        "robust_scale": {},  # defaults to mad_epsilon=1e-9, normal_consistency=1.4826
    },  # optional preprocessing pipeline
    repro_mode="balanced",
    return_diagnostics=True,
)

print("Low-level breakpoints:", low_level.breakpoints)
print("Algorithm:", low_level.diagnostics.algorithm)
print("Cost model:", low_level.diagnostics.cost_model)
```

`preprocess` is strictly validated: unsupported keys or invalid method/parameter
combinations raise `ValueError`.

`preprocess` is available in default PyPI wheels. For source builds, keep
`preprocess` in your enabled Rust feature set (for example, default
`maturin develop` in this repo or explicit `--features extension-module,serde,preprocess`).

## 5. Serialize results and plot breakpoints

```python
import cpd
import numpy as np

x = np.concatenate([
    np.zeros(50, dtype=np.float64),
    np.full(50, 5.0, dtype=np.float64),
    np.full(50, -2.0, dtype=np.float64),
])

outputs = [
    cpd.Pelt(model="l2", min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2),
    cpd.Binseg(model="l2", min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2),
    cpd.Fpop(min_segment_len=2).fit(x).predict(n_bkps=2),
    cpd.detect_offline(
        x,
        detector="pelt",
        cost="l2",
        constraints={"min_segment_len": 2},
        stopping={"n_bkps": 2},
    ),
]

restored_outputs = []
for result in outputs:
    payload = result.to_json()
    restored = cpd.OfflineChangePointResult.from_json(payload)
    assert restored.breakpoints == result.breakpoints
    assert restored.change_points == result.change_points
    restored_outputs.append(restored)

try:
    fig = restored_outputs[0].plot(x, title="Quickstart breakpoint view")
except ImportError:
    # Plotting is optional; install with `python -m pip install "changepoint-doctor[plot]==0.0.2"`.
    fig = None
```

Compatibility + limitations to keep in mind:

- `from_json(...)` accepts schema markers in the supported window (currently `1..=2`).
- `to_json()` emits the current writer marker (currently `1`).
- `plot()` is optional (`changepoint-doctor[plot]`) and `plot(ax=...)` is univariate-only.
- If `segments` are absent in a result, pass explicit `values` to `plot(...)`.

## 6. Run provided examples

```bash
cpd/python/.venv/bin/python cpd/python/examples/synthetic_signal.py
cpd/python/.venv/bin/python cpd/python/examples/csv_detect.py --csv /path/to/data.csv --column 0
cpd/python/.venv/bin/python cpd/python/examples/plot_breakpoints.py --out /tmp/cpd_breakpoints.png
```

Example scripts are exercised in CI/smoke coverage via
`cpd/python/tests/test_integration_mvp_a.py`.

## 7. Open notebook quickstarts

```bash
cd cpd/python
python -m pip install --upgrade "changepoint-doctor[notebooks]==0.0.2"
jupyter lab
```

Then open:

- `examples/notebooks/01_offline_algorithms.ipynb`
- `examples/notebooks/02_online_algorithms.ipynb`
- `examples/notebooks/03_doctor_recommendations.ipynb`
